A little more than kin, and less than kind!

Not so, my lord. I am too much in the sun.

Ay, madam, it is common. Seems, madam, Nay, it is. I know not 'seems.' It is not alone my inky cloak, good mother, Nor customary suits of solemn black, Nor windy suspiration of forced breath, No, nor the fruitful river in the eye, Nor the dejected havior of the visage, Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief, 'That can denote me truly. These indeed seem, For they are actions that a man might play; But I have that within which passes show- These but the trappings and the suits of woe.

I shall in all my best obey you, madam.

O that this too too solid flesh would melt, Thaw, and resolve itself into a dew! Or that the Everlasting had not fixed His canon against self-slaughter! O God! God! How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable Seem to me all the uses of this world! Fie on it! ah, fie! It is an unweeded garden That grows to seed; things rank and gross in nature Possess it merely. That it should come to this! But two months dead! Nay, not so much, not two. So excellent a king, that was to this Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother That he might not beteem the winds of heaven Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and earth! Must I remember? Why, she would hang on him As if increase of appetite had grown By what it fed on; and yet, within a month- Let me not think on it! Frailty, your name is woman!- A little month, or before those shoes were old With which she followed my poor father's body Like Niobe, all tears- why she, even she (O God! a beast that wants discourse of reason Would have mourned longer) married with my uncle; My father's brother, but no more like my father Than I to Hercules. Within a month, Before the salt of most unrighteous tears Had left the flushing in her galled eyes, She married. O, most wicked speed, to post With such dexterity to incestuous sheets! It is not, nor it cannot come to good. But break my heart, for I must hold my tongue!

I am glad to see you well. Horatio!- or I do forget myself.

Sir, my good friend- I'll change that name with you. And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio?

I am very glad to see you.- Good even, sir.- But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?

I would not hear your enemy say so, Nor shall you do my ear that violence To make it truster of your own report Against yourself. I know you are no truant. But what is your affair in Elsinore? We'll teach you to drink deep before you depart. Marcellus?

Please do not mock me, fellow student. I think it was to see my mother's wedding.

Thrift, thrift, Horatio! The funeral baked meats Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables. Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio! My father- I think I see my father.

In my mind's eye, Horatio.

He was a man, take him for all in all. I shall not look upon his like again.

The King my father?

For God's love let me hear!

But where was this?

Did you not speak to it?

Indeed, indeed, sirs. But this troubles me. Hold you the watch to-night?

From top to toe?

Then saw you not his face?

What, looked he frowningly.

And fixed his eyes upon you?

I would I had been there.

Very like, very like. Stayed it long?

His beard was grizzled- no?

I will watch to-night.

If it assume my noble father's person, I'll speak to it, though hell itself should gape And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all, If you have hitherto concealed this sight, Let it be tenable in your silence still; And whatsoever else shall hap to-night, Give it an understanding but no tongue. I will requite your loves. So, fare you well. Upon the platform, between eleven and twelve, I'll visit you.

Your loves, as mine to you. Farewell. My father's spirit- in arms? All is not well. I doubt some foul play. Would the night were come! Till then sit still, my soul. Foul deeds will rise, Though all the earth overwhelm them, to men's eyes.

The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.

The King does wake to-night and takes his rouse, Keeps wassail, and the swaggering upspring reels, And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down, The kettledrum and trumpet thus bray out The triumph of his pledge.

Ay, marry, is it; But to my mind, though I am native here And to the manner born, it is a custom More honoured in the breach than the observance. This heavy-headed revel east and west Makes us traduced and taxed of other nations; They clip us drunkards and with swinish phrase Soil our addition; and indeed it takes From our achievements, though performed at height, The pith and marrow of our attribute. So oft it chances in particular men That, for some vicious mole of nature in them, As in their birth,- wherein they are not guilty, Since nature cannot choose his origin,- By the overgrowth of some complexion, Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason, Or by some habit that too much overleavens The form of plausive manners, that these men Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect, Being nature's livery, or fortune's star, Their virtues else- be they as pure as grace, As infinite as man may undergo- Shall in the general censure take corruption From that particular fault. The dram of evil Does all the noble substance often dout To his own scandal.

Angels and ministers of grace defend us! Be you a spirit of health or goblin damned, Bring with you airs from heaven or blasts from hell, Be your intents wicked or charitable, You come in such a questionable shape That I will speak to you. I'll call you Hamlet, King, father, royal Dane. O, answer me? Let me not burst in ignorance, but tell Why your canonized bones, hearsed in death, Have burst their cerements; why the sepulchre Wherein we saw you quietly inurned, Has opened his ponderous and marble jaws To cast you up again. What may this mean That you, dead corse, again in complete steel, Revisits thus the glimpses of the moon, Making night hideous, and we fools of nature So horridly to shake our disposition With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls? Say, why is this? why? What should we do?

It will not speak. Then will I follow it.

Why, what should be the fear? I do not set my life at a pin's fee; And for my soul, what can it do to that, Being a thing immortal as itself? It waves me forth again. I'll follow it.

It waves me still. Go on. I'll follow you.

Hold off your hands!

My fate cries out And makes each petty artire in this body As hardy as the Nemean lion's nerve. Still am I called. Unhand me, gentlemen. By heaven, I'll make a ghost of him that lets me!- I say, away!- Go on. I'll follow you.

Whither will you lead me? Speak! I'll go no further.

Speak. I am bound to hear.

Haste me to know it, that I, with wings as swift As meditation or the thoughts of love, May sweep to my revenge.

O my prophetic soul! My uncle?

O, horrible! O, horrible! most horrible!

O all you host of heaven! O earth! What else? And shall I couple hell? Hold, hold, my heart! And you, my sinews, grow not instant old, But bear me stiffly up. Remember you? Ay, you poor ghost, while memory holds a seat In this distracted globe. Remember you? Yea, from the table of my memory I'll wipe away all trivial fond records, All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past That youth and observation copied there, And your commandment all alone shall live Within the book and volume of my brain, Unmixed with baser matter. Yes, by heaven! O most pernicious woman! O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain! My tables! Meet it is I set it down That one may smile, and smile, and be a villain; At least I am sure it may be so in Denmark. So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word: It is 'Adieu, adieu! Remember me.' I have sworn it.

Hillo, ho, ho, boy! Come, bird, come.

No, you will reveal it.

How say you then? Would heart of man once think it?

There's never a villain dwelling in all Denmark

Why, right! You are in the right! And so, without more circumstance at all, I hold it fit that we shake hands and part; You, as your business and desires shall point you, For every man has business and desire, Such as it is; and for my own poor part, Look you, I'll go pray.

I am sorry they offend you, heartily; Yes, faith, heartily.

Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio, And much offence too. Touching this vision here, It is an honest ghost, that let me tell you. For your desire to know what is between us, Overmaster it as you may. And now, good friends, As you are friends, scholars, and soldiers, Give me one poor request.

Never make known what you have seen to-night.

Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.

Aha boy, say you so? Are you there, truepenny? Come on! You hear this fellow in the cellarage. Consent to swear.

Never to speak of this that you have seen. Swear by my sword.

Hic et ubique? Then we'll shift our ground. Come hither, gentlemen, And lay your hands again upon my sword. Never to speak of this that you have heard: Swear by my sword.

Well said, old mole! Can work in the earth so fast? A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends."

And therefore as a stranger give it welcome. There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio, Than are dreamt of in your philosophy. But come! Here, as before, never, so help you mercy, How strange or odd soever I bear myself (As I perchance hereafter shall think meet To put an antic disposition on), That you, at such times seeing me, never shall, With arms encumbered thus, or this head-shake, Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase, As 'Well, well, we know,' or 'We could, an if we would,' Or 'If we list to speak,' or 'There be, an if they might,' Or such ambiguous giving out, to note That you know aught of me- this is not to do, So grace and mercy at your most need help you,

Rest, rest, perturbed spirit! So, gentlemen, With all my love I do commend me to you; And what so poor a man as Hamlet is May do to express his love and friending to you, God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together; And still your fingers on your lips, I pray. The time is out of joint. O cursed spite That ever I was born to set it right! Nay, come, let's go together.

Excellent well. You are a fishmonger.

Then I would you were so honest a man.

Ay, sir. To be honest, as this world goes, is to be one man picked out of ten thousand.

For if the sun breed maggots in a dead dog, being a god kissing carrion- Have you a daughter?

Let her not walk in the sun. Conception is a blessing, but not as your daughter may conceive. Friend, look to it.

Slanders, sir; for the satirical rogue says here that old men have grey beards; that their faces are wrinkled; their eyes purging thick amber and plum-tree gum; and that they have a plentiful lack of wit, together with most weak hams. All which, sir, though I most powerfully and potently believe, yet I hold it not honesty to have it thus set down; for you yourself, sir, should be old as I am if, like a crab, you could go backward.

You cannot, sir, take from me anything that I will more willingly part withal- except my life, except my life, except my life,

These tedious old fools!

My excellent good friends! How do you, Guildenstern? Ah, Rosencrantz! Good lads, how do ye both?

Nor the soles of her shoe?

Then you live about her waist, or in the middle of her favours?

In the secret parts of Fortune? O! most true! she is a

Then is doomsday near! But your news is not true. Let me question more in particular. What have you, my good friends, deserved at the hands of Fortune that she sends you to prison hither?

A goodly one; in which there are many confines, wards, and dungeons, Denmark being one of the worst.

Why, then it is none to you; for there is nothing either good or bad but thinking makes it so. To me it is a prison.

O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell and count myself a king of infinite space, were it not that I have bad dreams.

A dream itself is but a shadow.

Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs and outstretched heroes the beggars' shadows. Shall we to the court? for, by my fay, I cannot reason.

No such matter! I will not sort you with the rest of my servants; for, to speak to you like an honest man, I am most dreadfully attended. But in the beaten way of friendship, what make you at Elsinore?

Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks; but I thank you; and sure, dear friends, my thanks are too dear a halfpenny. Were you not sent for? Is it your own inclining? Is it a free visitation? Come, deal justly with me. Come, come! Nay, speak.

Why, anything- but to the purpose. You were sent for; and there is a kind of confession in your looks, which your modesties have not craft enough to colour. I know the good King and Queen have sent for you.

That you must teach me. But let me conjure you by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy of our youth, by the obligation of our ever-preserved love, and by what more dear a better proposer could charge you withal, be even and direct with me, whether you were sent for or no.

Nay then, I have an eye of you.- If you love me, hold not off.

I will tell you why. So shall my anticipation prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the King and Queen moult no

Why did you laugh then, when I said 'Man delights not me'?

He that plays the king shall be welcome- his Majesty shall have tribute of me; the adventurous knight shall use his foil and target; the lover shall not sigh gratis; the humorous man shall end his part in peace; the clown shall make those laugh whose lungs are tickle of the sere; and the lady shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall halt fort. What players are they?

How chances it they travel? Their residence, both in reputation and profit, was better both ways.

Do they hold the same estimation they did when I was in the city? Are they so followed?

How comes it? Do they grow rusty?

What, are they children? Who maintains them? How are they escoted? Will they pursue the quality no longer than they can sing? Will they not say afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common players (as it is most like, if their means are no better), their writers do them wrong to make them exclaim against their own succession.

Do the boys carry it away?

It is not very strange; for my uncle is King of Denmark, and those that would make mows at him while my father lived give twenty, forty, fifty, a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in

Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore. Your hands, come! The appurtenance of welcome is fashion and ceremony. Let me comply with you in this garb, lest my extent to the players (which I tell you must show fairly outwards) should more appear like entertainment than yours. You are welcome. But my uncle-father and aunt-mother are deceived.

I am but mad north-north-west. When the wind is southerly I know a hawk from a handsaw.

Hark you, Guildenstern- and you too- at each ear a hearer! That great baby you see there is not yet out of his swaddling

I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the players. Mark it.- You say right, sir; a Monday morning; twas so indeed.

My lord, I have news to tell you. When Roscius was an actor in Rome-

Then came each actor on his ass-

O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure hadst you!

Why, 'One fair daughter, and no more, The which he loved passing well.'

Am I not in the right, old Jephthah?

Nay, that follows not.

I heard you speak me a speech once, but it was never acted; or if it was, not above once; for the play, I remember, pleased not the million, it was caviary to the general; but it was (as I received it, and others, whose judgments in such matters cried in the top of mine) an excellent play, well digested in the scenes, set down with as much modesty as cunning. I remember one said there were no sallets in the lines to make the matter savoury, nor no matter in the phrase that might indict the author of affectation; but called it an honest method, as wholesome as sweet, and by very much more handsome than fine. One speech in it I chiefly loved. It was AEneas' tale to Dido, and thereabout of it especially where he speaks of Priam's slaughter. If it live in your memory, begin at this line- let me see, let me see: 'The rugged Pyrrhus, like the Hyrcanian beast-' It is not so; it begins with Pyrrhus: 'The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms, Black as his purpose, did the night resemble When he lay couched in the ominous horse, Has now this dread and black complexion smeared With heraldry more dismal. Head to foot Now is be total gules, horridly tricked With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons, Baked and impasted with the parching streets, That lend a tyrannous and a damned light To their lord's murder. Roasted in wrath and fire, And thus oversized with coagulate gore, With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus Old grandsire Priam seeks.' So, proceed you.

It shall to the barber's, with your beard.- Please say on. He's for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or he sleeps. Say on; come to

It is well. I'll have you speak out the rest of this soon.- Good my lord, will you see the players well bestowed? Do you hear? Let them be well used; for they are the abstract and brief chronicles of the time. After your death you were better have a bad epitaph than their ill report while you live.

God's bodykins, man, much better! Use every man after his desert, and who should scape whipping? Use them after your own honour and dignity. The less they deserve, the more merit is in your bounty. Take them in.

Follow him, friends. We'll hear a play to-morrow. Exeunt Polonius and Players. Do you hear me, old friend? Can you play 'The Murder of Gonzago'?

We'll have it to-morrow night. You could, for a need, study a speech of some dozen or sixteen lines which I would set down and insert in it, could you not?

Very well. Follow that lord- and look you mock him not. My good friends, I'll leave you till night. You are welcome to

Ay, so, God be with you! Now I am alone. O what a rogue and peasant slave am I! Is it not monstrous that this player here, But in a fiction, in a dream of passion, Could force his soul so to his own conceit That, from her working, all his visage waned, Tears in his eyes, distraction in his aspect, A broken voice, and his whole function suiting With forms to his conceit? And all for nothing! For Hecuba! What's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba, That he should weep for her? What would he do, Had he the motive and the cue for passion That I have? He would drown the stage with tears And cleave the general ear with horrid speech; Make mad the guilty and appal the free, Confound the ignorant, and amaze indeed The very faculties of eyes and ears. Yet I, A dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause, And can say nothing! No, not for a king, Upon whose property and most dear life A damned defeat was made. Am I a coward? Who calls me villain? breaks my pate across? Plucks off my beard and blows it in my face? Tweaks me by the nose? gives me the lie in the throat As deep as to the lungs? Who does me this, ha? God's wounds, I should take it! for it cannot be But I am pigeon-livered and lack gall To make oppression bitter, or before this I should have fatted all the region kites With this slave's offal. Bloody bawdy villain! Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless villain! O, vengeance! Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave, That I, the son of a dear father murdered, Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell, Must (like a whore) unpack my heart with words And fall a-cursing like a very drab, A scullion! Fie upon it! foh! About, my brain! Hum, I have heard That guilty creatures, sitting at a play, Have by the very cunning of the scene Been struck so to the soul that presently They have proclaimed their malefactions; For murder, though it have no tongue, will speak With most miraculous organ, I'll have these Players Play something like the murder of my father Before mine uncle. I'll observe his looks; I'll tent him to the quick. If he but blench, I know my course. The spirit that I have seen May be a devil; and the devil has power To assume a pleasing shape; yea, and perhaps Out of my weakness and my melancholy, As he is very potent with such spirits, Abuses me to damn me. I'll have grounds More relative than this. The play's the thing Wherein I'll catch the conscience of the King.

To be, or not to be- that is the question: Whether it is nobler in the mind to suffer The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune Or to take arms against a sea of troubles, And by opposing end them. To die- to sleep- No more; and by a sleep to say we end The heartache, and the thousand natural shocks That flesh is heir to. It is a consummation Devoutly to be wished. To die- to sleep. To sleep- perchance to dream: ay, there's the rub! For in that sleep of death what dreams may come When we have shuffled off this mortal coil, Must give us pause. There's the respect That makes calamity of so long life. For who would bear the whips and scorns of time, The oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely, The pangs of despised love, the law's delay, The insolence of office, and the spurns That patient merit of the unworthy takes, When he himself might his quietus make With a bare bodkin? Who would these fardels bear, To grunt and sweat under a weary life, But that the dread of something after death- The undiscovered country, from whose bourn No traveller returns- puzzles the will, And makes us rather bear those ills we have Than fly to others that we know not of? Thus conscience does make cowards of us all, And thus the native hue of resolution Is sicklied over with the pale cast of thought, And enterprises of great pith and moment With this regard their currents turn awry And lose the name of action.- Soft you now! The fair Ophelia!- Nymph, in your orisons Be all my sins remembered.

I humbly thank you; well, well, well.

Ha, ha! Are you honest?

That if you be honest and fair, your honesty should admit no discourse to your beauty.

Ay, truly; for the power of beauty will sooner transform honesty from what it is to a bawd than the force of honesty can translate beauty into his likeness. This was sometime a paradox, but now the time gives it proof. I did love you once.

You should not have believed me; for virtue cannot so inoculate our old stock but we shall relish of it. I loved you

Get you to a nunnery! Why would you be a breeder of sinners? I am myself indifferent honest, but yet I could accuse me of such things that it were better my mother had not borne me. I am very proud, revengeful, ambitious; with more offences at my beck than I have thoughts to put them in, imagination to give them shape, or time to act them in. What should such fellows as I do, crawling between earth and heaven? We are arrant knaves all; believe none of us. Go your ways to a nunnery. Where's your father?

Let the doors be shut upon him, that he may play the fool nowhere but in his own house. Farewell.

If you do marry, I'll give you this plague for your dowry: be you as chaste as ice, as pure as snow, you shall not escape

I have heard of your paintings too, well enough. God has given you one face, and you make yourselves another. You jig, you amble, and you lisp; you nickname God's creatures and make your wantonness your ignorance. Go to, I'll no more on it! it has made me mad. I say, we will have no moe marriages. Those that are married already- all but one- shall live; the rest shall keep as they are. To a nunnery, go.

Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced it to you, trippingly on the tongue. But if you mouth it, as many of our players do, I had as live the town crier spoke my lines. Nor do not saw the air too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently; for in the very torrent, tempest, and (as I may say) whirlwind of your passion, you must acquire and beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. O, it offends me to the soul to hear a robustious periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very rags, to split the cars of the groundlings, who (for the most part) are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumb shows and noise. I would have such a fellow whipped for overdoing

Be not too tame neither; but let your own discretion be your

O, reform it altogether! And let those that play your clowns speak no more than is set down for them. For there be of them that will themselves laugh, to set on some quantity of barren spectators to laugh too, though in the mean time some necessary question of the play be then to be considered. That's villanous and shows a most pitiful ambition in the fool that uses it. Go make you ready.

Bid the players make haste, Will you two help to hasten them?

Horatio, you are even as just a man As ever my conversation coped withal.

Nay, do not think I flatter; For what advancement may I hope from you, That no revenue have but your good spirits To feed and clothe you? Why should the poor be flattered? No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp, And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee Where thrift may follow fawning. Do you hear? Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice And could of men distinguish, her election Has scald you for herself. For you have been As one, in suffering all, that suffers nothing; A man that Fortune's buffets and rewards Have taken with equal thanks; and blessed are those Whose blood and judgment are so well commingled That they are not a pipe for Fortune's finger To sound what stop she please. Give me that man That is not passion's slave, and I will wear him In my heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart, As I do you. Something too much of this I There is a play to-night before the King. One scene of it comes near the circumstance, Which I have told you, of my father's death. Please, when you see that act afoot, Even with the very comment of your soul Observe my uncle. If his occulted guilt Do not itself unkennel in one speech, It is a damned ghost that we have seen, And my imaginations are as foul As Vulcan's stithy. Give him heedful note; For I mine eyes will rivet to his face, And after we will both our judgments join In censure of his seeming.

They are coming to the play. I must be idle. Get you a place.

Excellent, in faith; of the chameleon's dish. I eat the air,

No, nor mine now. My lord, you played once in the university, you say?

What did you enact?

It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a calf there. Be the players ready.

No, good mother. Here's metal more attractive.

Lady, shall I lie in your lap?

I mean, my head upon your lap?

Do you think I meant country matters?

That's a fair thought to lie between maids' legs.

O God, your only jig-maker! What should a man do but be merry? For look you how cheerfully my mother looks, and my father died within these two hours.

So long? Nay then, let the devil wear black, for I'll have a suit of sables. O heavens! die two months ago, and not forgotten yet? Then there's hope a great man's memory may outlive his life half a year. But, by our Lady, he must build churches then; or else shall he suffer not thinking on, with the hobby-horse, whose epitaph is 'For O, for O, the hobby-horse is forgot!'

Marry, this is miching malhecho; it means mischief.

We shall know by this fellow. The players cannot keep counsel; they'll tell all.

Ay, or any show that you'll show him. Be not you ashamed to show, he'll not shame to tell you what it means.

Is this a prologue, or the posy of a ring?

If she should break it now!

Madam, how like you this play?

O, but she'll keep her word.

No, no! They do but jest, poison in jest; no offence in the

'The Mousetrap.' Marry, how? Tropically. This play is the image of a murder done in Vienna. Gonzago is the duke's name; his wife, Baptista. You shall see anon. It is a knavish piece of work; but what of that? Your Majesty, and we that have free souls, it touches us not. Let the galled jade winch; our withers are unwrung.

I could interpret between you and your love, if I could see the puppets dallying.

It would cost you a groaning to take off my edge.

So you must take your husbands.- Begin, murderer. Pox, leave your damnable faces, and begin! Come, the croaking raven does bellow for revenge.

He poisons him in the garden for his estate. His name's Gonzago. The story is extant, and written in very choice Italian. You shall see anon how the murderer gets the love of Gonzago's wife.

What, frighted with false fire?

Why, let the strucken deer go weep, The hart ungalled play; For some must watch, while some must sleep: Thus runs the world away. Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers- if the rest of my fortunes turn Turk with me-with two Provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me a fellowship in a cry of players, sir?

A whole one I! For you do know, O Damon dear, This realm dismantled was Of Jove himself; and now reigns here A very, very- pajock.

O good Horatio, I'll take the ghost's word for a thousand pound! Did perceive?

Upon the talk of the poisoning?

Aha! Come, some music! Come, the recorders! For if the King like not the comedy, Why then, belike he likes it not, perdy. Come, some music!

Sir, a whole history.

Ay, sir, what of him?

Your wisdom should show itself more richer to signify this to the doctor; for me to put him to his purgation would perhaps plunge him into far more choler.

I am tame, sir; pronounce.

Make you a wholesome answer; my wit's diseased. But, sir, such answer is I can make, you shall command; or rather, as you say, my mother. Therefore no more, but to the matter! My mother, you say-

O wonderful son, that can so stonish a mother! But is there no sequel at the heels of this mother's admiration? Impart.

We shall obey, were she ten times our mother. Have you any further trade with us?

And do still, by these pickers and stealers!

Sir, I lack advancement.

Ay, sir, but 'while the grass grows'- the proverb is something

I do not well understand that. Will you play upon this pipe?

I do beseech you.

It is as easy as lying. Govern these ventages with your fingers and thumbs, give it breath with your mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent music. Look you, these are the stops.

Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing you make of me! You would play upon me; you would seem to know my stops; you would pluck out the heart of my mystery; you would sound me from my lowest note to the top of my compass; and there is much music, excellent voice, in this little organ, yet cannot you make it

Do you see yonder cloud that's almost in shape of a camel?

I think it is like a weasel.

Or like a whale.

Then will I come to my mother by-and-by.- They fool me to the top of my bent.- I will come by-and-by.

'By-and-by' is easily said.- Leave me, friends. It is now the very witching time of night, When churchyards yawn, and hell itself breathes out Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot blood And do such bitter business as the day Would quake to look on. Soft! now to my mother! O heart, lose not your nature; let not ever The soul of Nero enter this firm bosom. Let me be cruel, not unnatural; I will speak daggers to her, but use none. My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites- How in my words somever she be shent, To give them seals never, my soul, consent!

Now might I do it pat, now he is praying; And now I'll do it. And so he goes to heaven, And so am I revenged. That would be scanned. A villain kills my father; and for that, I, his sole son, do this same villain send To heaven. Why, this is hire and salary, not revenge! He took my father grossly, full of bread, With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May; And how his audit stands, who knows save heaven? But in our circumstance and course of thought, It is heavy with him; and am I then revenged, To take him in the purging of his soul, When he is fit and seasoned for his passage?

(within) Mother, mother, mother!

Now, mother, what's the matter?

Mother, you have my father much offended.

Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.

What's the matter now?

No, by the rood, not so!

Come, come, and sit you down. You shall not budge I You go not till I set you up a glass Where you may see the inmost part of you.

How now? a rat? Dead for a ducat, dead!

Nay, I know not. Is it the King?

A bloody deed- almost as bad, good mother, As kill a king, and marry with his brother.

Ay, lady, it was my word. You wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell! I took you for your better. Take your fortune. You find to be too busy is some danger. Leave wringing of your hinds. Peace! sit you down And let me wring your heart; for so I shall If it be made of penetrable stuff; If damned custom have not brazed it so That it is proof and bulwark against sense.

Such an act That blurs the grace and blush of modesty; Calls virtue hypocrite; takes off the rose From the fair forehead of an innocent love, And sets a blister there; makes marriage vows As false as dicers' oaths. O, such a deed As from the body of contraction plucks The very soul, and sweet religion makes A rhapsody of words! Heaven's face does glow; Yea, this solidity and compound mass, With tristful visage, as against the doom, Is thought-sick at the act.

Look here upon this picture, and on this, The counterfeit presentment of two brothers. See what a grace was seated on this brow; Hyperion's curls; the front of Jove himself; An eye like Mars, to threaten and command; A station like the herald Mercury New lighted on a heaven-kissing hill: A combination and a form indeed Where every god did seem to set his seal To give the world assurance of a man. This was your husband. Look you now what follows. Here is your husband, like a mildewed ear Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes? Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed, And batten on this moor? Ha! have you eyes You cannot call it love; for at your age The heyday in the blood is tame, it's humble, And waits upon the judgment; and what judgment Would step from this to this? Sense sure you have, Else could you not have motion; but sure that sense Is apoplexed; for madness would not err, Nor sense to ecstacy was never so thralled But it reserved some quantity of choice To serve in such a difference. What devil was it That thus has cozened you at hoodman-blind? Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight, Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all, Or but a sickly part of one true sense Could not so mope. O shame! where is your blush? Rebellious hell, If you can mutine in a matron's bones, To flaming youth let virtue be as wax And melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame When the compulsive ardour gives the charge, Since frost itself as actively does burn, And reason panders will.

Nay, but to live In the rank sweat of an enseamed bed, Stewed in corruption, honeying and making love Over the nasty sty!

A murderer and a villain! A slave that is not twentis part the tithe Of your precedent lord; a vice of kings; A cutpurse of the empire and the rule, That from a shelf the precious diadem stole And put it in his pocket!

A king of shreds and patches!- Save me and hover over me with your wings, You heavenly guards! What would your gracious figure?

Do you not come your tardy son to chide, That, lapsed in time and passion, lets go by The important acting of your dread command? O, say!

How is it with you, lady?

On him, on him! Look you how pale he glares! His form and cause conjoined, preaching to stones, Would make them capable.- Do not look upon me, Lest with this piteous action you convert My stern effects. Then what I have to do Will want true colour- tears perchance for blood.

Do you see nothing there?

Nor did you nothing hear?

Why, look you there! Look how it steals away! My father, in his habit as he lived! Look where he goes even now out at the portal!

Ecstasy? My pulse as yours does temperately keep time And makes as healthful music. It is not madness That I have uttered. Bring me to the test, And I the matter will reword; which madness Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace, Lay not that flattering unction to your soul That not your trespass but my madness speaks. It will but skin and film the ulcerous place, Whiles rank corruption, mining all within, Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven; Repent what's past; avoid what is to come; And do not spread the compost on the weeds To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue; For in the fatness of these pursy times Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg- Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.

O, throw away the worser part of it, And live the purer with the other half, Good night- but go not to my uncle's bed. Assume a virtue, if you have it not. That monster, custom, who all sense does eat Of habits evil, is angel yet in this, That to the use of actions fair and good He likewise gives a frock or livery, That aptly is put on. Refrain to-night, And that shall lend a kind of easiness To the next abstinence; the next more easy; For use almost can change the stamp of nature, And either the devil, or throw him out With wondrous potency. Once more, good night; And when you are desirous to be blessed, I'll blessing beg of you.- For this same lord, I do repent; but heaven has pleased it so, To punish me with this, and this with me, That I must be their scourge and minister. I will bestow him, and will answer well The death I gave him. So again, good night. I must be cruel, only to be kind; Thus bad begins, and worse remains behind. One word more, good lady.

Not this, by no means, that I bid you do: Let the bloat King tempt you again to bed; Pinch wanton on your cheek; call you his mouse; And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses, Or paddling in your neck with his damned fingers, Make you to ravel all this matter out, That I essentially am not in madness, But mad in craft. It were good you let him know; For who that's but a queen, fair, sober, wise, Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib Such dear concernings hide? Who would do so? No, in despite of sense and secrecy, Unpeg the basket on the house's top, Let the birds fly, and like the famous ape, To try conclusions, in the basket creep And break your own neck down.

I must to England; you know that?

There's letters sealed; and my two schoolfellows, Whom I will trust as I will adders fanged, They bear the mandate; they must sweep my way And marshal me to knavery. Let it work; For it is the sport to have the enginer Hoist with his own petar; and 't shall go hard But I will delve one yard below their mines And blow them at the moon. O, it is most sweet When in one line two crafts directly meet. This man shall set me packing. I'll lug the guts into the neighbour room.- Mother, good night.- Indeed, this counsellor Is now most still, most secret, and most grave, Who was in life a foolish peating knave. Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you. Good night, mother.

But soft! What noise? Who calls on Hamlet? O, here they come.

Compounded it with dust, whereto it is kin.

Do not believe it.

That I can keep your counsel, and not mine own. Besides, to be demanded of a sponge, what replication should be made by the son of a king?

Ay, sir; that soaks up the King's countenance, his rewards, his authorities. But such officers do the King best service in the end. He keeps them, like an ape, in the corner of his jaw; first mouthed, to be last Swallowed. When he needs what you have gleaned, it is but squeezing you and, sponge, you shall be dry

I am glad of it. A knavish speech sleeps in a foolish ear.

The body is with the King, but the King is not with the body. The King is a thing-

Of nothing. Bring me to him. Hide fox, and all after.

Not where he eats, but where he is eaten. A certain convocation of politic worms are even at him. Your worm is your only emperor for diet. We fat all creatures else to fat us, and we fat ourselves for maggots. Your fat king and your lean beggar is but variable service- two dishes, but to one table. That's the

A man may fish with the worm that has eat of a king, and eat of the fish that has fed of that worm.

Nothing but to show you how a king may go a progress through the guts of a beggar.

In heaven. Send thither to see. If your messenger find him not there, seek him in the other place yourself. But indeed, if you find him not within this month, you shall nose him as you go up the stair, into the lobby.

He will stay till you come.

I see a cherub that sees them. But come, for England! Farewell, dear mother.

My mother! Father and mother is man and wife; man and wife is one flesh; and so, my mother. Come, for England!

Good sir, whose powers are these?

How purposed, sir, I pray you?

Who commands them, sir?

Goes it against the main of Poland, sir, Or for some frontier?

Why, then the Polack never will defend it.

Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats Will not debate the question of this straw. This is the imposthume of much wealth and peace, That inward breaks, and shows no cause without Why the man dies.- I humbly thank you, sir.

I'll be with you straight. Go a little before. How all occasions do inform against me And spur my dull revenge! What is a man, If his chief good and market of his time Be but to sleep and feed? A beast, no more. Sure he that made us with such large discourse, Looking before and after, gave us not That capability and godlike reason To fust in us unused. Now, whether it be Bestial oblivion, or some craven scruple Of thinking too precisely on the event,- A thought which, quartered, has but one part wisdom And ever three parts coward,- I do not know Why yet I live to say 'This thing's to do,' Since I have cause, and will, and strength, and means To do it. Examples gross as earth exhort me. Witness this army of such mass and charge, Led by a delicate and tender prince, Whose spirit, with divine ambition puffed, Makes mouths at the invisible event, Exposing what is mortal and unsure To all that fortune, death, and danger dare, Even for an eggshell. Rightly to be great Is not to stir without great argument, But greatly to find quarrel in a straw When honour's at the stake. How stand I then, That have a father killed, a mother stained, Excitements of my reason and my blood, And let all sleep, while to my shame I see The imminent death of twenty thousand men That for a fantasy and trick of fame Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause, Which is not tomb enough and continent To hide the slain? O, from this time forth, My thoughts be bloody, or be nothing worth!

Has this fellow no feeling of his business, that he sings at grave-making?

It is even so. The hand of little employment has the daintier

That skull had a tongue in it, and could sing once. How the knave jowls it to the ground,as if it were Cain's jawbone, that did the first murder! This might be the pate of a Politician, which this ass now overreaches; one that would circumvent God, might it not?

Or of a courtier, which could say 'Good morrow, sweet lord! How do you, good lord?' This might be my Lord Such-a-one, that praised my Lord Such-a-one's horse when he meant to beg it- might it not?

Why, even so! and now my Lady Worm's, chapless, and knocked about the mazzard with a sexton's spade. Here's fine revolution, and we had the trick to see it. Did these bones cost no more the breeding but to play at loggets with them? Mine ache to think

There's another. Why may not that be the skull of a lawyer? Where be his quiddits now, his quillets, his cases, his tenures, and his tricks? Why does he suffer this rude knave now to knock him about the sconce with a dirty shovel, and will not tell him of his action of battery? Hum! This fellow might be in his time a great buyer of land, with his statutes, his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers, his recoveries. Is this the fine of his fines, and the recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine pate full of fine dirt? Will his vouchers vouch him no more of his purchases, and double ones too, than the length and breadth of a pair of indentures? The very conveyances of his lands will scarcely lie in this box; and must the inheritor himself have no more, ha?

Is not parchment made of sheepskins?

They are sheep and calves which seek out assurance in that. I will speak to this fellow. Whose grave's this, sirrah?

I think it be yours indeed, for you lie in it.

You do lie in it, to be in it and say it is yours. It is for the dead, not for the quick; therefore you lie.

What man do you dig it for?

Who is to be buried in it?

How absolute the knave is! We must speak by the card, or equivocation will undo us. By the Lord, Horatio, this three years I have taken note of it, the age is grown so picked that the toe of the peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier he galls his kibe.- How long have you been a grave-maker?

How long is that since?

Ay, marry, why was be sent into England?

How came he mad?

How long will a man lie in the earth before he rot?

Why he more than another?

Nay, I know not.

Let me see. Alas, poor Yorick! I knew him,

Do you think Alexander looked of this fashion in the earth?

And smelt so? Pah!

To what base uses we may return, Horatio! Why may not imagination trace the noble dust of Alexander till he find it stopping a bunghole?

No, faith, not a jot; but to follow him thither with modesty enough, and likelihood to lead it; as thus: Alexander died, Alexander was buried, Alexander returns into dust; the dust is earth; of earth we make loam; and why of that loam (whereto he was converted) might they not stop a beer barrel? Imperious Caesar, dead and turned to clay, Might stop a hole to keep the wind away. O, that that earth which kept the world in awe Should patch a wall to expel the winter's flaw! But soft! but soft! aside! Here comes the King-

That is Laertes, A very noble youth. Mark.

What, the fair Ophelia?

What is he whose grief Bears such an emphasis? whose phrase of sorrow Conjures the wandering stars, and makes them stand Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I, Hamlet the Dane.

You pray not well. Please take your fingers from my throat; For, though I am not splenitive and rash, Yet have I in me something dangerous, Which let your wisdom fear. Hold off your hand!

Why, I will fight with him upon this theme Until my eyelids will no longer wag.

I loved Ophelia. Forty thousand brothers Could not (with all their quantity of love) Make up my sum. What will you do for her?

God's wounds, show me what you will do. Would you weep? would you fight? would you fast? would you tear yourself? Would you drink up esill? eat a crocodile? I'll do it. Do you come here to whine? To outface me with leaping in her grave? Be buried quick with her, and so will I. And if you prate of mountains, let them throw Millions of acres on us, till our ground, Singeing his pate against the burning zone, Make Ossa like a wart! Nay, if you will mouth, I'll rant as well as you.

Hear you, sir! What is the reason that you use me thus? I loved you ever. But it is no matter. Let Hercules himself do what he may, The cat will mew, and dog will have his day.

So much for this, sir; now shall you see the other. You do remember all the circumstance?

Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting That would not let me sleep. Methought I lay Worse than the mutinies in the bilboes. Rashly- And praised be rashness for it; let us know, Our indiscretion sometime serves us well When our deep plots do pall; and that should learn us There's a divinity that shapes our ends, Rough-hew them how we will-

Up from my cabin, My sea-gown scarfed about me, in the dark Groped I to find out them; had my desire, Fingered their packet, and in fine withdrew To mine own room again; making so bold (My fears forgetting manners) to unseal Their grand commission; where I found, Horatio (O royal knavery!), an exact command, Larded with many several sorts of reasons, Importing Denmark's health, and England's too, With, hoo! such bugs and goblins in my life- That, on the supervise, no leisure bated, No, not to stay the finding of the axe, My head should be struck off.

Here's the commission; read it at more leisure. But will you bear me how I did proceed?

Being thus benetted round with villanies, Or I could make a prologue to my brains, They had begun the play. I sat me down; Devised a new commission; wrote it fair. I once did hold it, as our statists do, A baseness to write fair, and laboured much How to forget that learning; but, sir, now It did me yeoman's service. Will you know The effect of what I wrote?

An earnest conjuration from the King, As England was his faithful tributary, As love between them like the palm might flourish, As peace should still her wheaten garland wear And stand a comma between their amities, And many such-like as's of great charge, That, on the view and knowing of these contents, Without debatement further, more or less, He should the bearers put to sudden death, Not shriving time allowed.

Why, even in that was heaven ordinant. I had my father's signet in my purse, which was the model of that Danish seal; Folded the writ up in the form of the other, Subscribed it, gave it the impression, placed it safely, The changeling never known. Now, the next day Was our sea-fight; and what to this was sequent You know already.

Why, man, they did make love to this employment! They are not near my conscience; their defeat Does by their own insinuation grow. It is dangerous when the baser nature comes Between the pass and fell incensed points Of mighty opposites.

Does it not, think you, stand me now upon- He that has killed my king, and whored my mother; Popped in between the election and my hopes; Thrown out his angle for my Proper life, And with such deception- is it not perfect conscience To quit him with this arm? And is it not to be damned To let this canker of our nature come In further evil?

It will be short; the interim is mine, And a man's life is no more than to say 'one.' But I am very sorry, good Horatio, That to Laertes I forgot myself, For by the image of my cause I see The portraiture of his. I'll court his favours. But sure the bravery of his grief did put me Into a towering passion.

I humbly thank you, sir. Do know this waterfly?

Your state is the more gracious; for it is a vice to know him. He has much land, and fertile. Let a beast be lord of beasts, and his crib shall stand at the king's mess. It is a chough; but, as I say, spacious in the possession of dirt.

I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of spirit. Put your bonnet to his right use. It is for the head.

No, believe me, it is very cold; the wind is northerly.

But yet I think it is very sultry and hot for my complexion.

I beseech you remember.

Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in you; though, I know, to divide him inventorially would dozy the arithmetic of memory, and yet but yaw neither in respect of his quick sail. But, in the verity of extolment, I take him to be a soul of great article, and his infusion of such dearth and rareness as, to make true diction of him, his semblable is his mirror, and who else would trace him, his umbrage, nothing more.

The concernancy, sir? Why do we wrap the gentleman in our more rawer breath

What imports the nomination of this gentleman

I would you did, sir; yet, in faith, if you did, it would not much approve me. Well, sir?

I dare not confess that, lest I should compare with him in excellence; but to know a man well were to know himself.

That's two of his weapons- but well.

What call you the carriages?

The phrase would be more germane to the matter if we could carry cannon by our sides. I would it might be hangers till then. But on! Six Barbary horses against six French swords, their assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages: that's the French bet against the Danish. Why is this all imposed, as you call it?

How if I answer no?

Sir, I will walk here in the hall. If it please his Majesty, it is the breathing time of day with me. Let the foils be brought, the gentleman willing, and the King hold his purpose, I will win for him if I can; if not, I will gain nothing but my shame and the odd hits.

To this effect, sir, after what flourish your nature will.

Yours, yours. He does well to commend it

He did comply with his dug before he sucked it. Thus has he, and many more of the same bevy that I know the drossy age dotes on, only got the tune of the time and outward habit of encounter- a kind of yesty collection, which carries them through and through the most fanned and winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to their trial-the bubbles are out,

I am constant to my purposes; they follow the King's pleasure. If his fitness speaks, mine is ready; now or whensoever, provided I be so able as now.

She well instructs me.

I do not think so. Since he went into France I have been in continual practice. I shall win at the odds. But you would not think how ill all is here about my heart. But it is no matter.

It is but foolery; but it is such a kind of gaingiving as would perhaps trouble a woman.

Not a whit, we defy augury; there's a special providence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be now, it is not to come', if it be not to come, it will be now; if it be not now, yet it will come: the readiness is all. Since no man knows aught of what he leaves, what is it to leave betimes? Let be.

Give me your pardon, sir. I have done you wrong; But pardon it, as you are a gentleman. This presence knows, And you must needs have heard, how I am punished With sore distraction. What I have done That might your nature, honour, and exception Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness. Was it Hamlet wronged Laertes? Never Hamlet. If Hamlet from himself be taken away, And when he's not himself does wrong Laertes, Then Hamlet does it not, Hamlet denies it. Who does it, then? His madness. If it be so, Hamlet is of the faction that is wronged; His madness is poor Hamlet's enemy. Sir, in this audience, Let my disclaiming from a purposed evil Free me so far in your most generous thoughts That I have shot my arrow over the house And hurt my brother.

I embrace it freely, And will this brother's wager frankly play. Give us the foils. Come on.

I'll be your foil, Laertes. In mine ignorance Your skill shall, like a star in the darkest night, Stick fiery off indeed.

No, by this bad.

Very well, my lord.

This likes me well. These foils have all a length?

I'll play this bout first; set it by awhile.

I dare not drink yet, madam; by-and-by.

Come for the third, Laertes! You but dally. pray You Pass with your best violence; I am afeard You make a wanton of me.

How does the Queen?

O villany! Ho! let the door be locked. Treachery! Seek it out.

The point envenomed too? Then, venom, to your work.

Here, you incestuous, murderous, damned Dane, Drink off this potion! Is your union here? Follow my mother.

Heaven make you free of it! I follow you. I am dead, Horatio. Wretched queen, adieu! You that look pale and tremble at this chance, That are but mutes or audience to this act, Had I but time (as this fell sergeant, Death, Is strict in his arrest) O, I could tell you- But let it be. Horatio, I am dead; You live; report me and my cause aright To the unsatisfied.

As you are a man, Give me the cup. Let go! By heaven, I'll have it. O good Horatio, what a wounded name (Things standing thus unknown) shall live behind me! If you did ever hold me in your heart, Absent you from felicity awhile, And in this harsh world draw your breath in pain, To tell my story.

O, I die, Horatio! The potent poison quite overcrows my spirit. I cannot live to hear the news from England, But I do prophesy the election lights On Fortinbras. He has my dying voice. So tell him, with the occurrents, more and less, Which have solicited- the rest is silence.
